dotnet/runtime/issues/126831 Binary Formatter Instrumentation Proposal iteration PR (#19)
krwq/runtime-1: docs/bf-instrumentation-proposal.md

*Disclaimer: This is generated by LLM but fully reviewed and guided by me (and some edits).*

## Background and motivation

> `BinaryFormatter` was [fully removed from .NET 9](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/106240); the APIs remain inbox but throw `PlatformNotSupportedException` unless the [`System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters` compatibility package](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/standard/serialization/binaryformatter-migration-guide/compatibility-package) is installed. Active `BinaryFormatter` users today are therefore on .NET Framework, on .NET 6 / 7 / 8 (where it is still inbox and functional), or on .NET 9+ via the compat package. All of them are migration targets; many are also working in parallel to stop relying on `Type.GetType(string)`-based dynamic type resolution.

Reviewer: > All of them are migration targets;

I am not sure what this is trying to say.

> `BinaryFormatter` was [fully removed from .NET 9](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/106240); the APIs remain inbox but throw `PlatformNotSupportedException` unless the [`System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters` compatibility package](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/standard/serialization/binaryformatter-migration-guide/compatibility-package) is installed. Active `BinaryFormatter` users today are therefore on .NET Framework, on .NET 6 / 7 / 8 (where it is still inbox and functional), or on .NET 9+ via the compat package. All of them are migration targets; many are also working in parallel to stop relying on `Type.GetType(string)`-based dynamic type resolution.

Reviewer: > many are also working in parallel to stop relying on `Type.GetType(string)`-based dynamic type resolution.

This is a concern for other serializations that are deserializing the type names. These serializers should be called out explicitly.

> The gap is **observability**: discover which type names actually flow through `BinaryFormatter.Deserialize` (and through `Type.GetType(string)`) in a real workload, so a migration can inventory what to replace and what to allow-list. Both call sites resolve types from the same shape of input (assembly name + type name), so one event shape covers both.

Reviewer: I do not think that the observability is the main issue. If we were concerned about observability only, we would shore up the event and be done with it. 

I think the gap is:
- The event does not allow rejecting the type resolution request
- The event applies to binary serializer only

### Existing inbox infrastructure

- `System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters.Binary.BinaryFormatterEventSource` (in the compat package, `internal`) already emits ETW events for serialization / deserialization start, stop, and per-object. It does not surface the `assemblyName` / `typeName` strings used during binder resolution. Adding a new ETW event for type resolution alongside this source would require wiring a consumer-side ETW pipeline and would not give a handler a managed-code vantage point on each resolution.
- `SerializationBinder` (public, abstract, in the compat package) is the per-`BinaryFormatter`-instance hook for observation. It is unsuitable for process-wide instrumentation because it must be wired up per instance.

> - `Type.GetType(string)` has no comparable extension point. `AssemblyLoadContext.TypeResolve` (formerly `AppDomain.TypeResolve`) only fires for types the runtime fails to resolve through normal means; it cannot observe successful resolutions.

Reviewer: Also, there are profiler APIs that can be used to add a custom instrumentation any library. It is complicated and requires the application to have full control over its deployment.

## API

> A new public static event on each of `System.Type` and `System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters.Binary.BinaryFormatter` surfaces every type resolution. On .NET Framework, the event is also re-exposed through a netfx-only `Microsoft.Bcl.Serialization.Instrumentation` wrapper package because the .NET Framework targeting pack is frozen and does not surface the new inbox surface to compilers.

Reviewer: > surfaces every type resolution

This does not surface every type resolution. It specifically only surfaces type resolution done with Type.GetType.  Assembly.GetType and Module.GetType APIs (+ the binary formatter ones). It does not apply to type resolution done by internally by the runtime in other situations (for example, when deserializing custom attributes).

Is that right?

> A new public static event on each of `System.Type` and `System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters.Binary.BinaryFormatter` surfaces every type resolution. On .NET Framework, the event is also re-exposed through a netfx-only `Microsoft.Bcl.Serialization.Instrumentation` wrapper package because the .NET Framework targeting pack is frozen and does not surface the new inbox surface to compilers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A new public static event on each of `System.Type` and `System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters.Binary.BinaryFormatter` surfaces every type resolution. On .NET Framework, the event is also re-exposed through a netfx-only `Microsoft.Bcl.Serialization.Instrumentation` wrapper package because the .NET Framework 4.8.1 targeting pack is frozen.
```

Reviewer: I would avoid implying that there is never going to be .NET 4.8.2

> A new public static event on each of `System.Type` and `System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters.Binary.BinaryFormatter` surfaces every type resolution. On .NET Framework, the event is also re-exposed through a netfx-only `Microsoft.Bcl.Serialization.Instrumentation` wrapper package because the .NET Framework targeting pack is frozen and does not surface the new inbox surface to compilers.

Reviewer: How about remoting on .NET Framework? Remoting is built on top of binary serializer, and it has parallel implementation of the binary serializer in the C/C++ code in the runtime. Are all type resolutions done in binary formatter on behalf of remoting going to be instrumented?

Putting the events directly on `Type` and `BinaryFormatter` follows strong reviewer feedback that the feature should live on the types whose behavior it instruments, rather than on a sidecar static class. A sidecar `*Instrumentation` class in a separate namespace is kept as an alternative below.

```csharp
// SHIPS:
//   net11.0:                       inbox in System.Private.CoreLib
//   net481 (considered for servicing): inbox in mscorlib.dll (not surfaced through the targeting pack)
namespace System
{
    public partial class Type
    {
        public static event EventHandler<TypeResolvingEventArgs>? TypeResolving;
    }

    public sealed class TypeResolvingEventArgs : EventArgs
    {
        internal TypeResolvingEventArgs() { }

>         public string? AssemblyName { get; }

Reviewer: What is this AssemblyName string exactly? It can use documentation. None of the `System.Type` resolution APIs take an assembly name as a string.

Author: As far as I validated implementation I think it could be AssemblyName type, this was supposed to be assembly qualified name for simplicity in expected usage which is allow list, I'll add this to the proposal and make sure this is discussed during API review.

Reviewer: Can it be `Assembly` instance?

Note that the process can have multiple assemblies with the same name loaded, so providing AssemblyName or string is lossy. For example, the subscriber cannot check that it is the specific Assembly instance.

        public string TypeName { get; }
        public bool IgnoreCase { get; }
    }
}

// SHIPS:
//   net11.0:                       in the System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters compat package
//   net481 (considered for servicing): inbox in mscorlib.dll (not surfaced through the targeting pack)
namespace System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters.Binary
{
    public partial class BinaryFormatter
    {
        public static event EventHandler<BinaryFormatterTypeResolvingEventArgs>? TypeResolving;
    }

    public sealed class BinaryFormatterTypeResolvingEventArgs : EventArgs
    {
        internal BinaryFormatterTypeResolvingEventArgs() { }

        public BinaryFormatter Formatter { get; }
        public string AssemblyName { get; }
        public string TypeName { get; }
    }
}

// SHIPS:
//   Microsoft.Bcl.Serialization.Instrumentation NuGet package, single $(NetFrameworkMinimum) asset.

> //   This package is .NET Framework only — it has no netstandard or modern-.NET asset.

Reviewer: NuGet allows you to add net framework only packages in modern-.NET https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/core/porting/third-party-deps#net-framework-compatibility-mode (with a warning).

Just pointing it out. I do not think we need to do anything about this. It should just work anyway. (And if it does not work, that's fine.)

You may find it useful for testing. You can test and debug the compat package in .NET Core.

- `BinaryFormatter.TypeResolving` fires during deserialization each time the formatter is about to bind an `(assemblyName, typeName)` pair read from the serialized stream, before any `SerializationBinder.BindToType` is consulted. Repeated identical pairs within a single deserialization are deduplicated by the formatter's per-reader cache and do not re-fire the event.
- The wrapper's `TypeInstrumentation.TypeResolving` and `BinaryFormatterInstrumentation.TypeResolving` events on .NET Framework forward subscribers to the corresponding inbox events. Firing semantics are identical; the only behavioral difference is that `IsSupported == false` makes subscribe/unsubscribe a silent no-op on netfx patch levels that predate the inbox API.

> - Multiple subscribers are invoked in subscription order. Handlers should not throw; an exception from a handler propagates to the caller of `Type.GetType` / `BinaryFormatter.Deserialize` and subsequent handlers do not run.

Reviewer: > Handlers should not throw

I thought we explicitly want to allow rejecting unexpected type resolution attempts

### Usage

On modern .NET (net11.0 or later, with the compat package referenced for the `BinaryFormatter` half):

```csharp
BinaryFormatter.TypeResolving += (_, e) =>
{
    Log.Warn($"BF resolving [{e.AssemblyName}] {e.TypeName}");
};

Type.TypeResolving += (_, e) =>
{
    Log.Info($"Type.GetType: [{e.AssemblyName}] {e.TypeName}");
};
```

On .NET Framework, with the `Microsoft.Bcl.Serialization.Instrumentation` package referenced:

```csharp
using Microsoft.Bcl.Serialization.Instrumentation;

> if (BinaryFormatterInstrumentation.IsSupported)

Reviewer: Is this necessary? I would expect ` BinaryFormatterInstrumentation.TypeResolving` to still work fine, but do nothing when IsSupported returns false

## Servicing posture

- **net481** — under consideration for servicing: new public static event on `System.Type` and on `System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters.Binary.BinaryFormatter` in the next servicing baseline that accepts new surface. If accepted, documented on learn.microsoft.com and not added to the targeting pack. If servicing is declined, the wrapper package is the only access path on netfx and `IsSupported` permanently returns `false`.
- **net11.0 inbox** — `Type.TypeResolving` shipped through normal API review.
- **net11.0 compat package** (`System.Runtime.Serialization.Formatters`) — `BinaryFormatter.TypeResolving` shipped in the next major version of the package. The compat package already owns `BinaryFormatter`'s runtime behavior on modern .NET and is the migration/hardening vehicle for it.
- **.NET 6 / 7 / 8 / 9 / 10** — no servicing change. Backporting public API to in-service runtimes is avoided; the migration story for these runtimes is "upgrade to .NET 11."

## Alternatives

### `EventSource`-only

> Extending `BinaryFormatterEventSource` with a `TypeResolving` event and adding an analogous event source for `Type.GetType` would provide observability with no new managed API. It forces consumers to set up an ETW / EventListener pipeline and process events out-of-band rather than with an in-process managed handler, which is a heavier integration for what is typically a short-lived inventory exercise. EventSource events can still be added orthogonally for telemetry pipelines; they are not a substitute for the managed events proposed here.

Reviewer: > a short-lived inventory exercise

If we were to target a short-lived inventory, the event source would be the right approach for it ... you turn on the event for an existing app, collect the log, and you are done with it. You do not even need to rebuild the app to create the inventory...

I would avoid highlighting "a short-lived inventory" as the motivating scenario for this API as I have mentioned above.

## Risks

- **Public static event on `System.Type`.** The bar is high. Mitigations: the API is small (one event, one `EventArgs`), the event is opt-in and costs one null check when unsubscribed, and no existing hook surfaces every successful `Type.GetType(string)` resolution.
- **Handler exceptions.** An exception from a handler propagates to the caller of `Type.GetType` / `BinaryFormatter.Deserialize`. This is the standard managed-event contract but must be documented, since `Type.GetType` callers in particular do not expect user code on the resolution path.
- **Performance.** A static event with no subscribers is a single null check in the type resolution path — negligible. With subscribers it is one delegate invocation per resolved type, small relative to the cost of deserialization or `Type.GetType` itself.

> - **Trimming and Native AOT on modern .NET.** The events are statically referenced inbox API and are trim-safe.

Reviewer: This assumes that trimming or AOT compilation won't replace `Type.GetType(....)` call with the actual type.

> - **Wrapper EventArgs identity split.** Because the wrapper cannot use `[TypeForwardedTo]` to point at the inbox EventArgs (frozen netfx targeting pack), it defines its own copies. On serviced netfx patches that have the inbox API, two distinct CLR types co-exist for the same namespace + name. The wrapper translates internally; the constraint surfaces only at the netfx ↔ modern-.NET boundary in multi-targeted libraries. The sidecar alternative avoids this entirely.

Reviewer: > two distinct CLR types co-exist for the same namespace + name

Why is that? The translation should not require two distinct CLR types to co-exist for the same namespace + name,

> - **.NET Framework public API surface.** Adding new public API to `mscorlib` on .NET Framework 4.8.x is heavyweight. The surface is scoped to one event and one `EventArgs` on each of `Type` and `BinaryFormatter`; nothing speculative is added on that target.

Reviewer: I assumed that we are going to add these APIs as internal to .NET Framework to reduce the risk.
